the hammerhead has an incredible 360
degree vision that's called
binocular this creature's eyes are
tilted forward
and their field of vision overlaps the
wobby gong
means shaggy beard in an australian
aboriginal language
and just one look at this underwater
inhabitant can explain the name choice
the viper dogfish knows how to create
its own light in the deep ocean pitch
dark waters
the animal has needle-like teeth and
extendable jaws
this allows it to feed on prey half its
size
now at first sight all these creatures
have nothing in common whatsoever
but in reality all of them are sharks
there are more than 500 shark species in
the world and lots of them don't look as
if they're related
the most fearsome predators in the ocean
sharks have been around for more than
400 million years
they have adapted to all kinds of tough
conditions
now some of them can live in fresh water
rivers and lakes
these creatures vary in size from as
small as a human hand
to 40-foot long whale sharks now
most people would probably feel more
comfortable without sharks
lurking in the ocean depths but few of
them know
that the disappearance of sharks would
turn into a disaster for our planet
imagine waking up in the world without
these apex predators
if you're a surfer you wouldn't have to
scan the water for a shark's infamous
triangular fin if you're a regular beach
goer
you wouldn't have to be on your toes all
the time ready to sprint toward the
shore once you hear a lifeguard's
whistle
movie makers would be confused they'd
have to set off in search of a new
villain
but the truth is sharks aren't as bad as
they're pictured
not all of them are large torpedo-shaped
creatures with sharp teeth
for example the basking shark has small
teeth
and it doesn't even use them for feeding
the horned shark's teeth are
molar-like and help the animal to crush
its hard shell prey
and how can a tiny eight-inch long
deep-water dog fish harm you
unlike what lots of people think humans
aren't shark's favorite meal
usually we just get mistaken for similar
sized dolphins and seals
most shark species prefer fish squid and
clams
hey come to think of it so do i mmm
calamari
some are filter feeders it means they
get food by filtering sea water through
their gills or mouth
anyway back to the world without sharks
big shark species are at the top of the
ocean food chain
they hunt smaller fish for example tuna
those in turn eat even smaller sea
inhabitants
mostly bottom feeding species that live
off algae
if sharks disappeared it would totally
mess up the entire food chain
without sharks to control the fish
population the smallest algae eaters
would soon be swallowed up by predators
no bottom feeders and algae would grow
wild
along with bacteria they would move to
coral reefs
corals wouldn't be able to
photosynthesize sunlight they
used to get nutrients from the water and
carbon dioxide
wouldn't reach them reefs would fade
away leaving behind skeletons that would
later turn into limestone
it would lead to many marine species
going extinct
algae would also clog up fish gills and
pollute water and seafood
shark remains are an important food
source for lots of marine inhabitants
for example orcas other sharks and even
octopuses
without these remains these species
would be at risk of starvation
or let's say tiger sharks they live in
seagrass meadows and prevent turtles
from
over grazing the area if sharks weren't
on the lookout
all this underwater vegetation would be
gone in no time
and that would create a huge problem
scientists claim that 50 to 80 percent
of earth's oxygen
is produced in the ocean by plankton
that's algae drifting plants and some
kinds of bacteria
normally sharks feed on fish that gobble
down ocean generating plankton
no sharks and there might be a serious
shortage of oxygen in the world
little fish would thrive but only at
first if there were no
sharks injured in sick fish their most
common prey
would unbalance the schools they live in
this would cause nothing but chaos
plus fish left without control would eat
everything they see
little shrimps plankton and other
microorganisms
soon all of this would be gone and fish
would eventually starve
it would affect not only the world's
ecosystem but also the economy
like it happened once in north carolina
great white sharks were overfished there
and it allowed the ray population to
grow it resulted in hundreds of hungry
rays eating all the base gallops
the local fishery had to close when
there were no more scallops
rays moved on to other shelled sea
creatures
the disappearance of sharks would also
harm ecotourism
for example in the bahamas just one reef
shark brings about 250
000 over its lifetime divers pay this
money to see the creature in its natural
environment
one living whale shark brings belize two
million dollars during its lifetime
besides if there were no sharks we would
never know how amazing these creatures
are
see for yourself sharks don't have bones
their skeletons are made of cartilage
just like some parts of your ears and
your nose tip
cartilage is way lighter than real bones
plus
sharks liver are filled with oils that's
what helps them to be so
buoyant from afar shark's skin
may seem to be as smooth as that of
dolphins but in reality
it resembles sandpaper it's made up of
teeny teeth like scales
they point toward the tail and reduce
water friction when sharks swim
even though sharks don't have bones
their bodies can't fossilize
as these predators age they store
calcium in their skeletons to make them
stronger
that's why million-year-old shark jaws
feel as heavy and solid as bones
sharks have small black spots near their
eyes nose and mouth
they allow these animals to sense
electromagnetic fields and temperature
changes in the ocean
most shark species have an amazing night
vision
even cooler they can see colors they
have special reflective tissue at the
back of their eyes
which helps them see perfectly with
little light
now you might be able to tell a shark's
age by counting the rings on its
vertebrae
each vertebra has pairs of
semi-transparent and non-transparent
bands
if a vertebra has 10 band pairs the
shark is
10 years old such a count is not always
correct
but still the great white shark's bite
is no joke a 21 foot long creature can
produce
a force of more than four thousand
pounds per one square inch
it means the fish's jaws are four times
more powerful than those of a lion
or tiger and you with your bite force of
150 to 200 pounds per square inch
aren't even in the running sharks can
heat their eyes thanks to a special
retina
it helps them to have a better
resolution of everything they see around
and detect their prey some bottom
dwelling shark species
for example nurse or angel sharks have a
special
opening behind their eyes it supplies
oxygen directly to their brain and eyes
sharks use this organ when they're
resting at the sea floor or eating
but most shark species have to swim all
the time to pump water over their gills
sharks live in all oceans on the planet
but several species feel great in fresh
water
bull sharks for example can be found in
tropical rivers
they've adapted and can now live in both
fresh and salt water
and river sharks true to their name swim
in the rivers of new guinea australia
and south asia the number of teeth may
vary from species to species
but most sharks have more than 15 rows
of them in each jaw
one line after another they go from the
largest and most functional
up front to the smaller and less
powerful in the back
a shark can have as many as 35 000
cavity resistant teeth in a lifetime
now you as a human can shift only your
lower jaw
but a shark can move both its upper and
lower jaws
it allows the creature to have a better
grip while hunting
sharks not only smell things
exceptionally well
their hearing is excellent too they can
spot their prey from three thousand feet
away
because they hear low frequency sounds
the predators will easily recognize the
sounds made by a fish's contracting
muscle tissue
sharks are slow growing species and they
don't breed often
it makes them extremely vulnerable
people have better protect these
creatures
rather than fear them oh and finally
when you go to the casino poker tables
be wary of
one more species the card shark if
you're not
careful he'll take all your money